DOCS-7297 local variables with do (#1237)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-variables.adoc

+
* Local variables are initialized in the body of the DataWeave script and can be referenced by name only from within the scope of the expression where they are initialized.
+

> The syntax that MuleSoft recommends for initializing a local variable looks like this:

Reviewer: Can we GLOBALLY avoid referring to what MuleSoft recommends and replace it with a directive:
```suggestion
The syntax for initializing a local variable looks like this:
```

+
* Local variables are initialized in the body of the DataWeave script and can be referenced by name only from within the scope of the expression where they are initialized.
+

> The syntax that MuleSoft recommends for initializing a local variable looks like this:

Reviewer 2: This `do (<variable-name> = <expression>)` is not correct is 

```
do {
[type <name> = <type expression>]*
[var <name> = <expression>]*
[fun <name>(<params>*) = <expression>]*
[ns <name> <nsUri>]*
---
<body>
}
```

Author: done

[[example_local_variable]]
== Examples: Local DataWeave Variables

> In addition to declaring local variables through the `do` function (see xref:dataweave-flow-control#control_flow_do[Flow Control in DataWeave]), you can initialize local variables using literal expressions, variable reference expressions, or functional expressions. These expressions can reference any other local variables within their scope or any input or global variables.

Reviewer 2: Change function for operator

To initialize local variables, you can use either literal expressions, variable reference expressions, or functional expressions. These expressions can reference any other local variables within their scope or any input or global variables.

> MuleSoft recommends that you declare local variables within `do` scopes (see xref:dataweave-flow-control#control_flow_do[Flow Control in DataWeave]). The alternative method of declaring a scope with the `using` keyword is no longer recommended and only available for compatibility reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a best practice, declare local variables within `do` scopes (see xref:dataweave-flow-control#control_flow_do[Flow Control in DataWeave]). The alternative method of declaring a scope with the `using` keyword is no longer recommended and available only to provide compatibility.
```

You can only reference a local variable by name from within the scope of the expression that initializes it. The declaration can be prepended to any literal expression. The literal delimits the scope of the variable, so you cannot reference any variable outside of its scope.

> The examples that follow show initialization of local variables used in literal expressions. The syntax is the same.

Reviewer: The same as...?

Author: removed

> .Example: Scoped to Simple Value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example: Scoped to a Simple Value
```

> The following example sets the local variable `myVar` in a `do` scope. It calls `do` from the body of the DataWeave script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example sets the local variable `myVar` in a `do` scope. It calls `do` from the body of the DataWeave script:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
---
do {
      var myVar = 2
      ---
      3 + myVar
}
----

The result is `5`.

.Example: Scoped to an Array Literal

> The following example sets the local variable `myVar` in a `do` scope and uses it to set the value of the second element in the array to `2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example sets the local variable `myVar` in a `do` scope and uses it to set the value of the second element in the array to `2`:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/json
---
do {
      var myVar = 2
      ---
      [1, myVar, 3]
}
----

The result is `[ 1, 2, 3]`

.Example: Scoped to the Object literal
In the following example, references to all the variables are valid. `fn` and `ln` are defined and called within the `do` scope. The global `myVar` variable is also accessible from that scope.

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
var myVar = 1234
var myDo =  do {
    var fn = "Annie"
    var ln = "Point"
    ---
    {
      id : myVar,
      firstname : fn,
      lastname : ln
    }
}
output application/xml
---
{ person : myDo }
----

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<person>
  <id>1234</id>
  <firstname>Annie</firstname>
  <lastname>Point</lastname>
</person>
----

> .Example: *Invalid Reference* that is Outside the Scope

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example: *Invalid Reference* That Is Outside the Scope
```

The following example produces an error because `fromDoScope` is referenced from outside the scope of `do`. As a consequence, the concatenation operation (`++`) cannot append the name-value pair to the collection.

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
var myVar = 1234
var myDo =  do {
    var fn = "Annie"
    var ln = "Point"
    var fromDoScope = "Platform"
    ---
    {
      id : myVar,
      firstname : fn,
      lastname : ln
    }
}
output application/xml
---
{
    person : myDo ++ { "outsideDoScope" : fromDoScope }
}
----

The invalid example returns this error:
`Unable to resolve reference of fromDoScope.`

> .Example: Reference that is Inside a Function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example: Reference That Is Inside a Function
```

> The following example passes the string `HELLO` to the `test` function defined in the header. The `do` scope accepts the string, converts it to lower case, and then concatenates that string to the `suffix` variable, which is also defined in the header of the scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example passes the string `HELLO` to the `test` function defined in the header. The `do` scope accepts the string, converts it to lowercase, and then concatenates that string to the `suffix` variable, which is also defined in the header of the scope.
```

within the `do` scope. The global `myVar` variable is also accessible from that scope.

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
var myVar = 1234
var myDo =  do {

	var fn = "Annie"
	var ln = "Point"
	---
	{
      id : myVar,
      firstname : fn,
      lastname : ln
	}
}
output application/xml
---
{ person : myDo }

output application/xml
---
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<person>
  <id>1234</id>
  <firstname>Annie</firstname>
  <lastname>Point</lastname>
</person>
----

.Example: Invalid Reference that is Outside the Scope
This example produces an error because the `fromDoScope` is referenced from outside the
scope of the `do`. As a consequence, the concatenation operation (`++`) cannot append the name-value pair to the collection. 

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
var myVar = 1234
var myDo =  do {

	var fn = "Annie"
	var ln = "Point"
	var fromDoScope = "Platform"
	---
	{
      id : myVar,
      firstname : fn,
      lastname : ln
     }
}
output application/xml
---
{ person :
	myDo ++ { "outsideDoScope" : fromDoScope }
}
----

The invalid example returns this error:
`Unable to resolve reference of fromDoScope.`

> 

Reviewer 2: I would also add an example inside a function
```
fun test(param1: String) = do {
    var prefix = "123"
    fun innerTest(str: String) = lower(str) 
   ---
   innerTest(param1 ++ prefix)
}

```

Author: done as copy/paste with output
